# Analysis of Faith

* Outline
* Quotes

“I believe that in the end the truth will conquer.” ~ John Wycliffe

“Never let us be guilty of sacrificing any portion of truth on the altar of peace.” ~ J. C. Ryle

“As a matter of honor, one man owes it to another to manifest the truth.” ~ Thomas Aquinas
* [r/exmormon/comments/6xf27s/email_exchange_between_1st_counselor_in_sp_and/](https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/6xf27s/email_exchange_between_1st_counselor_in_sp_and/)
* Upshot:
* Church epistemology is flawed. The church’s truth claims do not make a compelling case for belief. The explanation that seems most in harmony with the facts is that Abrahamic religions are a human invention, and Mormonism is very much dependent on the Judeo-Christian tradition. However, Mormonism is found lacking when examined on its own claims.
* Intro:
* Introduction: Why does this matter? On Maps
* Driving around with an outdated, inaccurate GPS map is frustrating. Ideally, we want accurate maps to guide us, and the same is true of our beliefs, or at least is true in my case. Going through life with incorrect beliefs can be harmless, and sometimes even pleasant when the map is augmented with fantasies, but it can lead to problems. Pokemon Go can be fun, but it’s not for serious trips. Cognitive dissonance from the discrepancies between an incorrect map and the terrain it is supposed to describe is a burden in itself, and an incorrect map of life can lead to the wrong destination, or at least time spent chasing destinations that do not exist or that are quite different than the map shows. Whatever the benefits of an inaccurate map may be, I want to travel through life with the right map. There may not be a perfect map, and a correct map may not be able to answer all of the questions a false map could potentially answer, but I don’t want to be given wrong directions and guided to nonexistent destinations. I would prefer a limited but correct map, even one that seems incomplete, to one that does not match the reality I am traveling in.
* I don’t want to assume ex ante that the map I have used all my life is wrong, but I do want to compare it to the reality I see and examine whether it corresponds to reality as we know it. If it is not true, I will discard it in favor of a more correct map, and I will constanty correct it in order to bring it into conformity with the real world. Before looking at it, really intensely examining it, I don’t know whether it is a good and true map or not, but I am willing to accept whatever it is I find. I will accept the outcome regardless of how attached I am to the old map, how proud I am of it, and how long I have been driving around with it. If I find it to be false, I will discard it even if those around be are likely to be upset. On the other hand, if the map holds up under examination, I will keep it, and I would in fact be very glad to. This is what it means to be open-minded.
* This is, of course, a story where you already know how it ends. I probably wouldn’t write this if I had not found it necessary to throw out the map and begin putting together a new one. But the map analogy is a helpful introduction to how I view a search for the truth.
* I should also note that this is a problem-oriented document. I was raised fully aware of the good and uplifting aspects of the church, but my path toward disbelief involved many new facts and perspectives that I hadn’t been fully aware of before, and that is why I focus here on the problems, rather than the good and beautiful aspects that every member knows and loves. My faith journey has not been a willful fixation on the negative, but rather an attempt to see the whole picture. My experience having been what it has, many of the new things I have learned have been the problematic aspects that are absent in everyday experience in the church, and they are a large part of what I write about here.
* 1: Why We Believe What We Believe and How We Know What We Know
* epistemology
* -my reasoning: maximum likelihood
* psychology of belief
* -probability and presumption (also Mark Twain's quote)
* 1.1 On Epistemology
* lay down basic rules for arriving at truth
* non-contradiction
* willingness to accept the truth, whatever it may be; illegitimacy of motivated reasoning
* falsifiability (if claims cannot be used to establish falsehood, they are no good in establishing truth, either; otherwise, the belief is pure belief and not defensible)
* open-mindedness
* problems with unfalsifiable claims and explanations (miracles & God’s will, spiritual experiences - internally consistent, but not useful in terms of establishing truth)
* problems with false implication using the Book of Mormon and other Mormon branches
* The most important idea in my search for truth is the idea of truth itself. It’s hard to say exactly what truth is, but it’s eaier to say what it is not. Truth does not contradict itself, although it can be paradoxical. Those paradoxes are a matter of illusory perception or a lack of understanding, but real contradictions are impossible, at least in the everyday world we know through experience, as opposed to quantum mechanics and astrophysics. It’s hard to prove that something is unquestionably true, but it is much easier to rule out certain claims that have internal contradictions.    Another important assumption is that truth is independent of my perception. The more philosophical you get, the harder it is to trust that your perception is really reliable,  but it is true in general that different sane, healthy people can look at the same thing and agree on what it is. Regardless of the nature of reality, things seem to exist independently of humans, and they seem to stay that way even when you look away. For all intents and purposes, it’s safe to assume an objective truth that does not contradict itself.
* This implies that perceptions can be wrong. Believing or wishing something does not make it so. I have to accept truth as independent of what I believe or wish to believe, and that is where the rules of logic come into play as a means of arriving at truth.
* On Apologetics and Motivated Reasoning
* address common apologetic objections and tactics
* ex hypothesi approach:     -http://mormoncurtain.com/topic_apologists.html
* [mormoninformation.com/pro_lds.htm](http://www.mormoninformation.com/pro_lds.htm)
* [mormonthink.com/glossary/apologist.htm](http://www.mormonthink.com/glossary/apologist.htm)
* Assuming the desired conclusion and then gathering and interpreting evidence to fit is not honest, nor is it valid. Attacking those who doubt or disbelieve is not valid. An argument needs to be met and discussed on its own merits.

<Daniel C. Peterson quote>
* To avoid the Straw Man Fallacy myself, I need to clarify that this is not always the case with apologists, but it is generally the case in my experience. There are honest apologists who do look at the facts and who treat others with remarkable dignity, such as Richard Bushman, Patrick Mason, and Terryl and Fiona Givens, but they seem to be the minority. I do disagree with some their methods of reasoning and the conclusions they draw, but they are honest with the facts and in their discussions with others.
* This is worth mentioning because I need to specify beforehand what is sound reasoning and what is not. The kind of fallacies described above are called motivated reasoning, and they are an entirely class of very widespread fallacies found not only in matters of religion, but also in politics, everyday conflicts, and in almost every other area imaginable where two people might disagree. I recognize I am not immune to motivated reasoning just because I am not an apologist, and so I have tried to be very careful not to use any underhanded tricks in my logic.
* The Backfire Effect is worth mentioning. Essentially, it is the tendency
* On Spiritual Experiences as a Means for Discovering Truth
* An important concept here, and maybe the central concept, is the idea of spiritual experiences as a source of truth. I have been taught from a young age about the witness of the Holy Ghost and I built my life around the testimony I had received and the way I was taught to interpret it. It was fairly recently that I fully realized that there are some problems with this epistemology that I can’t ignore.
* The first is the non-uniqueness of spiritual experiences. Muslims, FLDS, Orthodox Jews, and even Wiccans are among the many other religious groups who have testified to spiritual truth-confirming experiences that are remarkably similar to those we LDS talk about ([link](http://infantsonthrones.com/the-mormon-testimony-bearing-phenomenon/): listen to the first few minutes copy useful audio to avoid IOT accusations?). The problem for our faith is that most of these people hear the influence Holy Ghost (or its equivalent in their religion) confirming to them the truthfulness of their own religion, not of ours. The witness for them is not just that there is some element of good in their religion, as we acknowledge, but that their religion is uniquely true. This is a well-studied phenomenon in psychology and is sometimes called [elevation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elevation_(emotion)). William James talks about this phenomenon in *The Varieties of Religious Experience* and relates interesting examples of times this has happened to non-Mormons. It is true that there are many religions that rely primarily of authority or tradition or a holy book as their claim to truth, rather than a spiritual religious experience, but we are far from unique in our claim to spiritual revelatory experiences. The claim that we can know our church is uniquely true by the same spiritual means that other religions use as well (see A Sociology of Religious Emotion) is problematic, because unless I am willing to wave my hands and dismiss everyone else as somehow being misguided or deceived, I have to acknowledge, at minimum, that there are others who are very convinced that their spiritual experiences are just as valid as mine, and theirs lead them to various different conclusions that are mutually exclusive with my own. Mark Twain expressed his thoughts on competing religious claims this way: “The easy confidence with which I know another man's religion is folly teaches me to suspect that my own is also.” The fact that others are just as convinced as Mormons are that their beliefs are right isn’t at all a conclusive proof that Mormons are wrong, but as a minimum, it undermines the uniqueness of our epistemology and leads me to ask difficult questions about why I have believed what I was raised to believe and wanted to believe with such conviction. If billions of others are wrong about what their spiritual experiences mean, who am I, in addition to believing I was one of the few chosen or lucky enough to be born into God’s one correct church, to believe that I am one of the very few who is interpreting his feling of spiritual confirmation correctly? There are other problems with LDS epistemology which I discuss here (insert link), but the universality of humans having transcendent spiritual experiences and often understanding them as confirmation of some spiritual truth is the most forceful objection to me, and one that has led me reconsider reconsider my own views.
* It seems to be the case that spiritual confirmations follow a desire to believe (as the scriptures mention), and anecdotally, spiritual confirmations of “unessential” elements of the Gospel, like D&C 132 or the inhumane portions of the Old Testament or the sexist bits in the New Testament don’t tend to get spiritual confirmation for people who find them abhorrent. Conversely, just in case this is due to hard-heartedness, people often seem to get confirmations of things they strongly agree with, such as Christ’s grace and mercy or the special status of America as the promised land or the supreme importance of limited government and personal liberty. Liberals who value tolerance tend to get spiritual confirmations of God’s unconditional love and tolerance, while more conservative hardliners receive witnesses of the importance of standing strong for God’s unchanging satandards. Are these spiritual witnesses sent becuase they are especially needed to convince people of a view that is hard to accept? That seems unlikely; there may be a better explanation. But for those like Helen Mar Kimball who receive spiritual witnesses of extremely undesirable ideas, there seems to be a social aspect at work. In her case, it was the exaltation of her family hinging on her decision to marry Jospeh Smith as a 14-year-old. There are others who receive spiritual prompting that are even harder to account for, and I confess that there is sometimes not a straightforward explanation, although social conditioning and messaging seems likely to play a part. But the fact that I do not have a perfect something does not lead me to conclude that it must therefore have a divine explanation or that it should be taken as evidence of a particular set of truth claims, and it does not trump the other issues with spirituality as a mens of arriving at truth. I have to follow the evidence to the conclusion that is most probably true.
* The other epistemological flaw, and one that applies even more directly to my own experience is the loaded die we roll we roll in the search for spiritual knowledge. I speak for myself, but I know that it is a common experience for children raised LDS. I knew as a child that when I read the Book of Mormon and prayed for a spiritual confirmation, there had to be one because God promised there would be. If I didn’t get one, something was wrong with me, and I would have to keep praying. The alternative was unthinkable, and I didn’t want to disappoint my family. Looking back, it’s much easier to see that what is sometimes billed as an experiement is not valid because it is not falsifiable. If you need to keep praying until you get an answer, and if you are led to believe something is wrong with you if you don’t get an answer, that is a process designed like a one-sided die.
* The second problem is the common experience of spiritual witnesses of things that are factually false. Paul H. Dunn is the notorious example of a speaker who said inspiring things in inspiring ways, and many people have testified having felt the spirit during his talks. Awkwardly enough, it later came out that many things he had said were just false, and this naturally raises questions about the Spirit as a witness of truth. Is it still consistent to say the Spirit was just confirming the good parts and the true principles behind what he said? Of course, but if a liar can cause the Spirit to be felt by large groups of people, this suggests (but doesn’t prove) that the Spirit may be a personal emotional response, rather than a witness of truth, or that the Spirit is good at telling us what is good and uplifting, rather than what is strictly true.
* This is related to a third issue which is often expressed in this common question in the church: “How can I tell the Spirit apart from my own thoughts and feelings?” Elder Bednar’s answer in an MTC talk is that often we can’t, so we should just be “good boys and girls” and the end result will be the same. In other words, we don’t need to know whether a thought or feeling is the Spirit if we are following what we are taught and listening to our conscience. If that is the case, why should we be able to recognize the Spirit when He tells us about truth? There are answers to this, such as that when we hear a confirmation of truth, is is powerful and unmistakable, as opposed to random thoughts, but this is still problematic for me. More importantly, it still leaves the identification problem, which is the real problem for me: people of other faiths have the same kinds of spiritual confirmatory experiences.
* As a side note, one less devastating critique, but one that is still interesting in the Mormon context is the fallacious implication from a spiritual witness of the Book of Mormon to the truthfulness of the SLC LDS church. There are over a dozen sects that believe in the Book of Mormon, and even if we accept it as true, it doesn’t follow that this particular Mormon branch is true. Is it because we are the biggest and richest of them all? Is it because we make the best Bible videos and have the best website? We aren’t the most in line with what Joseph Smith or even Brigham Young and John Taylor originally taught. What rules out the possibility of apostasy somewhere along the line? Why don’t we stress the importance of
* To be clear, I’m not discounting anyone’s spiritual experiences. They are an important part of life, and they deserve to be respected as deeply personal, meaningful, and transformative. What I find incorrect and even sometimes deceitful is the way we are taught to interpret our spiritual experiences as confirming the truthfulness of a church. To put it succinctly, feeling good does not provide us with knowledge of truth. I have felt profoundly moved when reading certain books, and watching certain movies that I knew to be fictional. I haved felt moved praying and reading the Book of Mormon, and while I value the memory of those spiritual experiences, I no longer find it appropriate to interpret the experiences as a divine confirmation of unrelated or tangentially related truth claims.
* Even dreams and visions cannot establish universal truth because the world has seen many dreams and visions that contradict each other. Some visions are induced by hallucinogens or illness, but it is not necessary to explain away every instance. Most faiths, the LDS faith included, need to deny a large number of others’ attested divine visitations just as their own are denied by many others. This becomes a contest of credibility, and if we decide that some claims of divine manifestations are worthy of investigation, the internal and external consistency of a religion’s truth claims matter. This is where a study of the particulars of a religion’s claims becomes important. If the religion makes claims about its truthfulness that cannot stand up to close scrutiny, the already tenuous claim that spiritual manifestations are enough becomes even less defensible, and an open-minded truth seeker is better off looking elsewhere for truth. The basic principle is that if something appears to be a human invention and bears multiple telltale signs of a human invention, it very probably is. To use one of the faith’s own metaphors, a wise man builds upon a firm foundation, and a foundation riddled with cracks is not a firm foundation for one hoping to see things as they really are. I will discuss some historical realities about the Judeo-Christian tradition and the LDS church in particular to discuss whether their claims are supported by their own respective histories.
* 2. The Historical Record and Religious Truth Claims
* history of Abrahamic religions and religion in general
* -change in Christianity from a radical pacifist religion to religion of power
* -
* 2.1 On Methods of Historical Evaluation
* It is common practice to defend early church leaders and reconcile disturbing discrepancies in order to maintain belief. The problem with this is that it is clearly motivated reasoning. Even if everything can be satisfactorily explained away, which I personally do not find to be the case, we are still left with some troubling problems. If the historical, unwhitewashed Joseph Smith is historically indistinguaishable from a fraud, and if the church today is functionally indistinguishable from other manmade and mortal-run churches, what is a reasonable person to conclude? A spiritual witness is hugely problematic, as discussed earlier, and the history, while fascinating and not without its admirable and remarkable moments, at best does not compel belief, and in my view powerfully discourages it.
* The very most important thing I can do with a historical record is to be aware of it; nothing else is of much use until I am aware of what it is I am dealing with. I need to be aware of what is generally agreed upon
* 2.2 History and the Judeo-Christian Tradition
* 2.3 History of the LDS Church
* Joseph Smith was convicted of fraud in 1826 and had a reputation as someone who was hired out to find treasure using his magical stone. He never found treasures, although he charged for his services, and he claimed when nothing was found that the treasures had slipped further into the earth. He claimed to have a set of golden plates, one that he could show to no one for a long time for fear they would die upon exposure to something they were not authorized to see, yet he had to go to great lengths to hide them from potential thieves. He claimed to have translated ancient papyri written by the hand of Abraham, and the papyri found since then have made it clear that the papyri were neither written by Abraham, nor connected to him in any way, nor from the same time period, nor translated accurately by any stretch of the imagination. He founded a banking enterprise using deceit and it soon failed. He married other women without his first wife Emma’s consent or knowledge, some of whom were married to other men, some having their husbands away on missions. His practice of plural marriage clearly contradicted the revelation he had received in D&C 132, and his first plural marriage to Fanny Alger, alleged adultery by the disaffected Oliver Cowdery, pre-dated the restoration of the sealing power in 1836. He died sealed to at least 33 wives without having been sealed to his own immediate family. He publicly denied the practice of polygamy, and when the Nauvoo Expositor printed truthfully that he was practicing polygamy, he used his office of mayor to order the militia to destroy it, which led to his imprisonment in the jail where he was assasinated. He told multiple accounts of the “First Vision” that are not reconcilable with each another, and his accounts of the priesthood restoration is contradictory and bears the signs of having been embellished after the fact. He joined the Methodist church after God had supposedly told him to join none of the sects, whose creeds were “an abomination.” He made several prophecies that did not come true, at least not by any reasonable interpretation of the words as they would have been understood. He prophecied that a temple would be built in Independence in his generation, but “generation” has to mean “dispensation” in order for that one to hold. He prophecied that David Patten would serve a mission, six months before David Patten died. He prophecied that the Second Coming of Jesus Christ would take place in 56 years from 1835, in the context of pruning the vineyard “for the last time,” clearly an eschatological prophecy. Now, 182 years later, we rationalize this prophecy as having referred to the Lord’s reported appearance at Kirtland, but we have been ministering and “pruning the vineyard” ever since then, so it was not the last time. Can one honestly claim that the prophecy would have been meant or understood to mean anything but the Second Coming? I find the apologetics very unconvincing. Other prophecies needed to be generously interpreted by apologists to be spun as prophetic at all, and his predictions are not more accurate or more impressive than those of many other self-proclaimed prophets. He introduced the temple ceremony two months after entering a masonic lodge, and the parallels are unmistakable. The temple ceremony is hard to understand as anything other than a “secret combination” as condemned in the Book of Mormon, especially because the covenants could be construed as a means for the church to “get gain” and power, and because of the Oath of Vengeance originally included. Joiseph Smith married a 14-year-old girl, having given her 24 hours’ notice and told her that it would ensure the salvation of her entire family and claimed to have been threatened by an angel with a drawn sword. These are a small sampling of the many indications in the historical record that Joseph Smith was not to be trusted, and that he had fabricated the church. This is a sampling, certainly drawn from the more damning end of the spectrum, but the complete larger picture that I have received from multiple books on church history written by neutral, hostile, and friendly scholars, and from primary sources when possible, is the same
* These actions are not the actions of someone whom I would consider trustworthy. Point-by-point, apologists offer explanations that help those who want to believe, but that I find unconvincing due to their motivated reasoning. The totality of Joseph Smith’s life and ministry more closely resembles the actions of a charismatic leader who is brilliantly skilled in fabrication and manipulation than a man acting on errand from an omniscient, omnipotent, and loving God. When I consider the historical Joseph Smith, he is not a man I would be willing to count on to tell the truth. I don’t know, and I can’t know, how much of his own narrative Joseph Smith believed, but I do know that I myself find his claims suspect. If a likable, respectable young man who did a lot of good in his community were caught with a massive stash of cash in his bedroom and if his fingerprints were found all over safes at the bank, he should be convicted for robbery no matter how much good he had done previously in his community, how much good he had done previously, or how many people vouched for his character. For me, the historical trial of Joseph as a religious inventor is similar. There is not an alibi that is strong enough to reject the evidence that his church was the fabrication of himself and his close associates.
* The Book of Mormon, the keystone of our religion, was once the lynchpin of my belief. Even if polyandry and the church’s racist history were troubling, I could always fall back on my testimony of the Book of Mormon. There was, I was told, no credible explanation for its origins without the power of God. When I finally decided to look more deeply into the history, I was amazed to discover that not only are there other plausible explanations, but they seem much more likely to be true.
* Archaeology does not support belief in the Book of Mormon as historical. There was a stone discovered on the Arabian Peninsua with the inscription *Nahom* matching a place describe in the Book of Mormon, and there is a place that seems to fit the desription of Bountiful, but those are two pieces of evidence against a stunning lack of archaeological evidence in the Americas, and two pieces of evidence cannot be ruled out as coincidence in face of overwhelming evidence to the contrary. DNA evidence and linguistic evidence do not help the Book of Mormon case, and the history we know of the Olmecs, Toltecs, Mayans, and others do not fit with Book of Mormon history. Plants known to be indegenous to the Americas, such as squash, maize, and potatoes, are not described, while crops known to have been introduced by Europeans, such as wheat, barley, oats, millet, and rice are found in the Book of Mormon. There is not even archaeological evidence that they may have existed earlier and then died out, except for camels and horses, which went extinct before 10,000 B.C. The same is true of animals mentioned in the Book of Mormon, such as cattle, pigs, chickens, horses, donkeys, or camels. The possibility of loose naming has been suggested; Spaniards called prickly pears “figs,” and it seems likely Hebrews would have done the same, but the discrepancies seem expansive enough to make this very unlikely to explain everything. Furthermore, if that is the case, why are there also innovative names for animals in the Book of Mormon, such as Cumoms and Cureloms? There is a similar lack of evidence for iron, steel, glass, and silk, which are also mentioned in the literature, while at the same time, we have fossilized pollen from millenia ago.
* In places where large-scale battles have been fought, it is highly unusual to find no traces, even when the battle was fought millenia ago. We have the artefacts of the classical Mayan period, and of the Olmecs, who were much earlier. They were advanced civilizations, and such complex civilizations do not usually vanish without a trace. It seems odd that there has not been a single finding of anything confirmed as a Nephite artefact, while the archaeology of the Holy Land supports many of the historical claims in the Bible.
* This begs the question: How could Joseph Smith, and “uneducated farmboy” write a book of such complexity as the Book of Mormon? There are a few good clues.
* Thomas Ferguson
* mother told of imagination
* the Late War
* View of the Hebrews
* similarities of place names
* errors from 1769 version of the Book of Mormon
* 19th-century issues and ideas
* protestant overtones
* 11 witnesses
* 3. Science and Religious Truth Claims
* 3.1 Scientific Method and Belief
* Because it is often easier to determine when something is not true than when it is actually true, the scientific method has proven the most reliable way for arriving at truth. Its basic process is to formulate a hypothesis and then collect information to confirm or falsify it. Falsified hypotheses include Ptolemy’s geocentric hypothesis, the self-evident flat-earth hypothesis (supported by Thales and Democritus, for example), Aristotle’s hypothesis of spontaneous generation, the Blank Slate hypothesis of Aquinas, Locke, and others, and Newton’s clockwork universe. These were not hypotheses advanced by fools or malicious deceivers; they represented the best scientists of their times and worked with what they had. Many of the theories were important stepping stones on the way to another theory that was closer to the truth. These hypotheses were generally considered self-evident and credible by the experts of their day, but were later shown to be false. The important lesson they hold for us is that sometimes correct reasoning leads to unexpected and even undesired conclusions. Sometimes they faced profound opposition. Socrates, Rhazes, Galileo Galilei, Servetus, Avenzoar, Lanfranchi, and many others have faced persecution for their discoveries and work, often because it threatening existing religious and political authorities. But this leads us to ask why it is that good scientists will accept falsification of their hypotheses, but religious people often do not? Is it hubris, or stubbornness, or willful ignorance? Is it because spiritual feelings trump all reason?
* Even today, science is controversial in areas like macroevolution, climate change, and some fields of biological research, but it would be hard to deny that the scientific method has been vindicated. Nearly everyone has faith in science to some degree, whether they understand how it works or not, and whether or not the word “science” evokes a reponse response from them or not. When people set foot in an airplane, or use a GPS, or drive through a long tunnel, or undergo a complex surgery, iit isn’t religious faith that assures them they will probably survive. Even people who believe in miraculous healings often choose medical treatment, not because they don’t have faith in God, but also because they know that science has a good track record as well. Nowhere has prayer been shown to make more of a difference than random statistical chance, but because the religious highlight the outliers, they are able to maintain belief. Science, in contrast to religion, is subjected to intense scrutiny, and unlike religion, it delivers.
* Science is pragmatic. While it is not flawless, and its practicioners certainly are not, it has been successful because it follows facts and results. (Part of this comes from competition. When there is fame and fortune on the line, a scientist has a real incentive to criticize his competitors’ work; he doesn’t want it to be true, because he wants the ) As Karl Popper pointed out, science also owes its success to falsifiability. If there’s not the possibility that a theory could be shown wrong, it has no business posing as a theory, because there is also no way of demonstrating its truth. The theory of the existence of God is a religious rather than a scientific theory because it is not falsifiable, as the past few centuries of debate have shown. There are arguments for and against His existence, but the claims are not falsifiable because there is always some explanation. If we pray for Janie to be miraculously healed and she dies anyway, that is not a falsification; that can be explained as God’s will. Just as importantly, the doctrine of God differs from person to person, so it is hard to test. There are always explanations, but there have not been away that are unassailable.
* My religion, as impossible as it is to prove or disprove, does not have a shortage of truth claims that are falsifiable. There is a never-ending debate about interpretation and limited understanding in the past, but it is worth looking at some of the truth claims that have been made, what we have learned about them, and how they have changed over time.
* 3.2 Science and the Bible
* The Bible makes a number of falsifiable truth claims that have in fact been falsified, and many of the specific claims have come to be interpreted more generally. The most damning claims are the early events of the Bible, such as Noah’s Ark and the Tower of Babel. the astronomy of the Bible is also a clear product of its times, rather than the product of divine omniscience.
* firmament
* geocentrism
* pi at 3.0
* annihilation of Canaanites
* [americanhumanist.org/what-is-humanism/reasons-humanists-reject-bible/](https://americanhumanist.org/what-is-humanism/reasons-humanists-reject-bible/)
* [rationalwiki.org/wiki/Biblical_contradictions](https://rationalwiki.org/wiki/Biblical_contradictions)
* [truth-saves.com/false-claims](http://truth-saves.com/false-claims)
* exodus and contour of the Red Sea
* flat earth
* anachronisms in history of Christ’s birth
* Jericho’s anachronisms
* failed prophecies
* → Islamic and other apologetics and close parallels
* 3.3 Science and the Book of Mormon
* 3.4 Science and the Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price
* importance of origins and foundations:
* Judaism -> Christianity -> Early Mormonism -> Contemporary Mormonism: Can Christianity be true if Judaism is false? Can Mormonism be true if Christianity is false? Can current Mormonism be true if earlier Mormonism was false? Problem of continuity in religion
* psychology of belief, elation, universality of faith-confirming spiritual experiences
* emphasize legitimacy of these experiences, but not of their interpretation
* ex ante approach (hypothesis testing method): what do we expect in a perfect religion led by an omniscient, omnipotent God and bearing His power
* speak to the nuanced view of imperfect humans vs. a big picture that points to the untruthfulness of it all
* mistakes and weaknesses are allowable, but it is reasonable to expect that God’s One True Church would be distinguishable from a manmade church (make comparisons to other churches & show that if JS had been a fraud, the church would have looked very similar)
* objections to religion:
* epistemological problems treated in intro
* conflicts with science
* -disease and disorder vs. demons
* -problem with "faithfully waiting" for answers when there are even better onesthat don't require waiting on and praying to a suspect God
* indistinguishability from a man-made church; like Judaism, Islam, etc., began with a high concentration of miracles and is shrouded by legend and myth, but those remarkable occurences seem to have stopped today
* --miracles not distinguishable from remarkable and rare miracles
* 4. On Theology
* Churches are not just groups of people who like to get together; each church has its own set of beliefs that form a more-or-less coherent worldview for its members. There
* theological dilemmas
* -Christian
* --agency and influence
* --problem of evil
* -LDS-specific
* --presentism implicit in trusting prophets
* --very idea of atonement
* --missionary work and incentives (better off without it)
* --dilemma in under 8's going to CK
* --temple work
* --ethnocentrism and tiny percentage of the world's population with access to the true church
* 5. The LDS Church Today
* It would be neglectful to look only at the church in the past without giving the church we know today due consideration. There are very good people in the church, and some very good people who choose to belong, and while they are familiar with the problems they arbitrarily choose to believe. Many see this as their best possible option, and others, such as Richard Lyman Bushman, see belief as a moral choice.
* I think that considering the effects of the church today is important in weighing the morality of different courses of action relating to belief and belonging. No organization I know of is all good or all bad, but organizations have a net effect, and that is what concerns me with the LDS church.
* I believe it is worth testing the church we know today against its own claimed heritage. The Restoration occured to restore divine authority to the earth and to allow us to hear God’s voice through His chosen servants. In light of this, it seems odd that the difficult questions are shied away from by the leadership of the church, including those many would consider the most theologically savvy, such as Elder Holland (in exchanges with John Dehlin and Tom Phillips) and Elder Uchtdorf (in a response written by his secretary to ?Letter to an Apostle from Paul Douglas). If they are in a position to know God’s mind, it might seem reasonable to
* Another concern regarding church leadership today is its unmistakable corporatism. The leaders of the church are not fishermen from humble backgrounds; almost without exception, they are from corporate and legal backgrounds. This is not damning in itself; after all, if it is the Lord who calls them, He can call whomever He pleases. However, taken together with the fact that even the prophets and apostles theologically limited, even compared to top leaders of other major churches and the fact that they have shown a lack of discernment,, this casts doubt on their role as special witnesses and ministers, as opposed to corporate administrators. The lack of discernment and the demonstrated insecurity in their role as seers has been made clear on several occasions. One was the episode with Mark Hoffman, where the leaders with the highest claim to discernment were deceived by a skilled forger. Notably, the infamous anti-mormon Tanners saw through the fraud and told the church so, and they were later proven correct. How does one reconcile anti-Mormon scholars possessing higher powers of discernment than the Lord’s chosen Apostles? Paul H. Dunn also told numerous lies from the church pulpit. Why did none of the prophets and apostles listining to him discern his lies? Another example was when the original “Book of Abraham” papyri turned up in a museum. Rather than have the apostles, who are sustained as “prophets, seers, and revelators” verify or correct Joseph Smith’s translation, they left it to the apologists. Joseph Smith’s seer stone was found, but it is not used by the church. Some claim that this is done because we live in a time of skepticism, and we do not want to expose ourselves to ridicule. Why are we afraid of ridicule? Do we think that the early church was never ridiculed, or that they shied away from it? Was Peter afraid of ridicule (Acts 5:29)? Or was using a seer stone normal back then or ridiculous today? It seems that God’s modus operandi has changed to the extent that current prophets receive revelation through the spirit, as Gordon B. Hinckley explained in his interview. It is hard to see the leadership of the church today as anything but a managing board of directors that does not typically do the things that Joseph Smith was known for, although they hold his same priesthood. Elder Packer and others have taught that some spiritual experiences are so sacred, it is improper to testify to the world about them, but Joseph Smith and his first successors, were hardly shy in telling stories of profound spiritual experiences, and the discrepancy becomes clear to a student of church history. The spiritual gifts that are reported to have been poured out upon the early saints would be considered absurd in today’s church, and much less out of place in a Pentecostal church. It may be that we do not have enough faith, even though we have been billed as a “chosen generation” with exceptional faith.
* Another problem is that the tradition of “lying for the Lord” which was prevalent in the days of Joseph Smith and Brigham Young, has not yet fully died out. President Gordon B. Hinckley
* An organization with nothing to hide and that is truly concerned with the truth does not deliberately hide facts and deceive its membership. This has not been the case in the LDS church.
* When I started learning about behavioral economics, psychology, and sociology, I was fascinated by the ways in which it is possible to manipulate behavior, information, thoughts, and emotions. It turns out there is a well-researched model of control, called the BITE model for the four things mentioned above that high-control organizations do to maintain control. It is remarkable to me how many of these things apply to the LDS church.
* There are things the church today does that are harmful and reprehensible and that I criticized even as a believing member. While they are not conclusive proof of the church’s falsehood, they do not help its case for me, and they are worth montioning here. They include its treatment of homosexuals and sometimes women and their former treatment of racial minorities, especially those of African descent.
* lies told by GBH and others
* -problem with churches during the "Great Apostasy" and similarities to the church today, "author of so much confusion" quote
* value critiques
* --humility
* --insecurity about honest, unfiltered truth
* --sexism
* harm perpetuated by church
* --child interviews and abuse
* --mental health
* --LGBTQ issues
* --polygamy
* --sexism
* --BITE
* --racism, white supremacy
* --nationalism
* --lying for the Lord
* --violence
* --spiritual abuse
* non-uniqueness of the good in Mormonism; non-exceptionalism (contrasted with "I'm special" feelings)
* thought experiments:
* Would I convert to the church if I were not a member right now?
* What good does the church do for me if it is not literally the OTC with God's authority?
* What if the church is true and I am wrong? (Does God look at the heart, or is He the more legalistic God we sometimes imagine?)
* 5. The Big Picture and Conclusions Drawn
* The church, and religion in general, have all the telltale signs of being man-made and man-directed. The existence of some kind of Supreme Entity is harder to reason about, and remains a possibility to be open about. Currently, the best explanation of the world I know is found in the theories science has rigorously tested and found to be in accordance with the truth. Religion does not provide a consistent moral foundation for human life, and its falsifiable claims and predictions about the world have not fared well throughout time. Religion has changed as human society has changed, and while it has made worthwhile contributions to human flourishing, its values have been influenced from the outside. The spirituality that is often found in religion is often beneficial, but the supposition that it is inseparable from religion appears false.
* This is not an assertion that God does not exist, but rather that God's existence is not certain, and also that if God does exist, we do not know its character. What I can say with reasonable certainty is that the God who came into being as Yahwe and has also been called Elohim and our Heavenly Father does not exist as such; He has shown himself to be changeable while calling himself unchangeable. He has insisted that his ways are higher while making it quite clear his ways are lower. He has changed his mind and told blatant falsehoods through his prophets. He has caused his prophets to say things that were later shown to be false or in conflict with other things his prophets said. He has also called himself the God of truth and has been described as omniscient and omnipotent. He is the God of miracles, and yet miracles are what we call the remarkable phenomena that, statistically speaking, can be expected to occur from time to time. This omnipotent God performed wonders millennia ago, but many aspects of the world no longer need miraculous explanations. It may be that miracles happen, but if they do, they do not happen exclusively in a given church or even religion. The divine or perceived impressions of the divine manifest themselves to people all over the world of all religious backgrounds.
* The fact that not all phenomena do have a clear explanation is not a good evidence of God. That is a "God of the gaps," who has been shrinking in size ever since the most basic discoveries began to be made. Lightning was once a sign of divine anger, while today we understand what causes it. It is simply a logical fallacy to infer the existence of God simply because there are thing we do not understand.
* There is one weakness to all this logic. It may be that God is not a God of logic, and he has set up the world in such a way that reason generally leads toward disbelief (especially toward traditional religion), as is certainly the case in the balance of scientists and other intellectuals. It may be that he inspired his prophets to utter falsehoods in order to test our faith. It may be that he rigged the decay of carbon atoms and planted dinosaur fossils in the earth in order to deceive those who dare question. But then why does he deceive or allow to be deceived the billions of his children who have received spiritual manifestations of the truthfulness of the wrong church? I don't think much of a hypothetical God who gives his children reason and intellect only to then lead them away from the truth, and who doesn't provide a clear way to receive even a spiritual manifestation of the truth. If that is the kind of arbitrary and untrustworthy being who governs the universe, I am not inclined to have trust in him. Fortunately, it is much more probable, given the facts, that he does not exist, just as thousands of other Gods do not exist. As noted, the existence of any kind of God as a force or higher power is much more difficult to ascertain.
* Notes
* Further Reading